23.0.0.10-beta staging (#3341)
OpenLiberty/blogs: posts/2023-09-26-23.0.0.10-beta.adoc

The recent addition of the Open Liberty `springBoot-3.0` feature allows Spring Boot 3.x-based applications to be deployed with Open Liberty.  And now, with the new Open Liberty `crac-1.3` feature, a Spring Boot 3.2-based application can be deployed with Liberty InstantOn in order to achieve rapid startup times for your Spring Boot application.

To use the CRaC 1.3 functionality with the `springBoot-3.0` feature, you must be running with Java 17 or higher and use the `crac-1.3` feature.  Additionally, if your application uses Servlet, it  needs to use the `servlet-6.0` feature.  These features are configured in the `server.xml` file as follows:

[source,xml]
----
<features>
   <feature>springBoot-3.0</feature>
   <feature>servlet-6.0</feature>
   <feature>crac-1.3</feature>
</features>
----

With these features enabled you can containerize your Spring Boot 3.2 application with Liberty InstantOn support by following the link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/instanton.html[Liberty InstantOn documentation] along with following the Liberty recommendations for containerizing Spring Boot applications with the link:{url-prefix}/guides/spring-boot.html[Liberty Spring Boot guide].

> For more information and an example Spring Boot application using the Liberty InstantOn `crac-1.3` feature see the link:/blog/2023/09/25/spring-boot-3-instant-on.html[How to containerize your Spring Boot application for rapid startup] blog post.

Reviewer: Need to pay attention to the timing of these blogs.  The general beta blog is set to publish 09/26 and this referenced one is set to publish 9/25.  Are we OK with that timing and we can depend on this link working when published?

Reviewer 2: @dmuelle @GraceJansen FYI the date on the spring-boot-3-instant-on post.

[source,xml]
----
<webApplication location="demo-microprofile-telemetry-inventory.war" contextRoot="/">
    <!-- enable visibility to third party apis -->
    <classloader apiTypeVisibility="+third-party"/>
</webApplication>
----

For more information about MicroProfile Telemetry, see:

* link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-telemetry[MicroProfile Telemetry spec]
* link:https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.11.0/specification/trace/api.md[OpenTelemetry spec]
* link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/microprofile-telemetry.html[MicroProfile Telemetry docs]
   
   
// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> 

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // // 
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/26222
// Contact/Reviewer: Azquelt
// // // // // // // // 

[#mpapi]
== MicroProfile OpenAPI  endpoint path configuration

MicroProfile OpenAPI generates and serves OpenAPI documentation for JAX-RS applications that are deployed to the Open Liberty server. The OpenAPI documentation is served from `/openapi` and a user interface for browsing this documentation is served from `/openapi/ui`.

> With MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1, you can configure the paths for these endpoints by adding configuration to your `server.xml`. For example:
>      
> [source,xml]
> ----
> <mpOpenAPI docPath="/myOpenAPI/path" uiPath="/myUi/Path" />
> ----

Reviewer 3: Could I make a small revision here to make it clearer what the config example does please?

Otherwise this section looks good to me.

```suggestion
With MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1, you can configure the paths for these endpoints by adding configuration to your `server.xml`. For example:
     
[source,xml]
----
<mpOpenAPI docPath="/my/openapi/doc/path" uiPath="/docsUi" />
----

Setting this configuration on a local test server would mean that you would then access the OpenAPI document at `localhost:9080/my/openapi/doc/path` and the UI at `localhost:9080/docsUi`.
```

Primary Keys are LTPA keys in the specified keys default `ltpa.keys` file. Primary keys are used both for generating new LTPA tokens and for validating LTPA tokens. There can only be one primary keys file per Liberty Server.

Validation keys are LTPA keys in any other `.keys` files other than the primary keys file. The validation keys are only used for validating LTPA tokens. They are _not_ used for generating new LTPA tokens. All validation keys must be located in the same directory as the primary keys file.

  
There are 2 ways to enable LTPA keys rotation without a planned outage:

*  Use the Liberty Server's new capability to monitor the directory of the primary keys file for any new validation keys files. Enable the `monitorDirectory` and `monitorInterval` attributes. For example, add the following configurations to the `server.xml`:
+
[source,xml]
----

> <ltpa monitorDirectory="true" monitorInterval="5"/>

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<ltpa monitorDirectory="true" monitorInterval="5m"/>

```

   1. Copy the primary keys file (`ltpa.keys`) to a validation keys file, for example `validation1.keys`.
   2. Modify the server configuration to use the validation keys file  by specifying a `<validationKeys>` server configuration element inside the `<ltpa>` element. For example, add the following configuration to the `server.xml` file:
+
[source,xml]
----
<ltpa>
    <validationKeys fileName="validation1.keys" password="{xor}Lz4sLCgwLTs=" notUseAfterDate="2024-01-02T12:30:00Z"/>
<ltpa/>  
----
+
The `validation1.keys` file can be removed from usage at a specified date-time in the future with the optional attribute, `notUseAfterDate`.  It is recommended to use `notUseAfterDate` to remove validation keys after a given period as it can improve performance.
+
The `fileName` and `password` attributes are required in the `validationKeys` element, but `notUseAfterDate` is optional.
+
After the validation keys file is loaded from the server configuration update, the original primary keys file (`ltpa.keys`) can be deleted, which triggers new primary keys to be created while continuing to use `validation1.keys` for validation.
+

> Specifying validation keys this way can also be combined with using monitor directory to ready more validation keys that are specified in server.xml configuration. For example:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Specifying validation keys this way can be combined with enabling monitor directory to also use validation keys that are not specified in server.xml configuration at the same time. For example:

```

+
[source,xml]
----
<ltpa monitorDirectory="true" monitorInterval="5m">
    <validationKeys fileName="validation1.keys" password="{xor}Lz4sLCgwLTs=" notUseAfterDate="2024-01-02T12:30:00Z"/>
<ltpa/>
----
+     
To see all of the Liberty `<ltpa>` server configuration options see link:/docs/latest/reference/config/ltpa.html[LTPA configuration docs].
    

>     

Reviewer 4: another paragraph I was asked to add to the end:
```suggestion
  This feature also provides the new capability to perform one-way Single Sign-On (SSO) for LTPA tokens which was not previously possible. Before this feature, SSO for LTPA tokens could only be bi-directional, not one-way, and required using the same `ltpa.keys` file on every applicable Liberty server. The new "one-way" SSO  means a user will be able to use SSO from Liberty server1 to server2, but not from server2 to server1.
 - If you have two (or more) Liberty servers, for example server1 and server2, each with a different LTPA primary keys file - Adding the primary keys file from server1, as a validation keys file to server2 will allow one-way single sign-on capability from server1 to server2. 
  
  - A user who authenticated to server1 first will be able to access server2 with SSO. However, a user who authenticates to server2 first will need to re-authenticate again before accessing server1 because server1 does not have the primary keys file from server2.

```

Reviewer 2: Will leave this out (as discussed on Slack) because this is useful in traditional deployments but not relevant to cloud-native deployments, which is our focus here.

   1. Copy the primary keys file (`ltpa.keys`) to a validation keys file, for example `validation1.keys`.
   2. Modify the server configuration to use the validation keys file  by specifying a `<validationKeys>` server configuration element inside the `<ltpa>` element. For example, add the following configuration to the `server.xml` file:
+
[source,xml]
----
<ltpa>
    <validationKeys fileName="validation1.keys" password="{xor}Lz4sLCgwLTs=" notUseAfterDate="2024-01-02T12:30:00Z"/>
<ltpa/>  
----
+
The `validation1.keys` file can be removed from usage at a specified date-time in the future with the optional attribute, `notUseAfterDate`.  It is recommended to use `notUseAfterDate` to remove validation keys after a given period as it can improve performance.
+
The `fileName` and `password` attributes are required in the `validationKeys` element, but `notUseAfterDate` is optional.
+
After the validation keys file is loaded from the server configuration update, the original primary keys file (`ltpa.keys`) can be deleted, which triggers new primary keys to be created while continuing to use `validation1.keys` for validation.
+

> Specifying validation keys this way can be combined with enabling monitor directory to also use validation keys that are not specified in server.xml configuration at the same time. For example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Specifying validation keys in this way can be combined with enabling monitor directory to also use validation keys that are not specified in the `server.xml` configuration at the same time. For example:

```

This beta previews the abundant new capabilities that the Open Liberty team are currently working on. This beta previews both MicroProfile 6.1 (Metrics, Telemetry, and OpenAPI) and Java 21 implementations in Open Liberty. It also introduces the new capability to give your Spring Boot applications faster startup times with little or no extra effort with Liberty InstantOn; if you have any Spring apps to hand, give it a try. There are a couple of new updates to make it easier to manage security configurations in containerized environments, and Jakarta Data beta 3.

// // // // // // // //
// Change the RELEASE_SUMMARY to an introductory paragraph. This sentence is really
// important because it is supposed to grab the readers attention.  Make sure to keep the blank lines 
//
// Throughout the doc, replace 23.0.0.10-beta with the version number of Open Liberty, eg: 22.0.0.2-beta
// // // // // // // //

The link:{url-about}[Open Liberty] 23.0.0.10-beta includes the following beta features (along with link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/feature-overview.html[all GA features]):

* <<mp61, MicroProfile 6.1>>

> * <<mpmetrics, MicroProfile Metrics 5.1 for 23.0.0.10-beta>>

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* <<mpmetrics, MicroProfile Metrics 5.1>>

```

    
  
// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> 

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // // 
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/26183
// Contact/Reviewer: yasmin-aumeeruddy
// // // // // // // // 
[#mptel]
== MicroProfile Telemetry 1.1

MicroProfile Telemetry 1.1 provides developers with the latest Open Telemetry technology; the feature now consumes OpenTelemetry-1.29.0, updated from 1.19.0. Consequently, a lot of the dependencies are now stable. 

To enable the MicroProfile Telemetry 1.1 feature, add the following configuration to your `server.xml`:

[source,xml]
----
<features>
   <feature>mpTelemetry-1.1</feature>
</features>
----

Additionally, third-party APIs must be made visible for your application in the `server.xml`:

[source,xml]
----
<webApplication location="demo-microprofile-telemetry-inventory.war" contextRoot="/">
    <!-- enable visibility to third party apis -->
    <classloader apiTypeVisibility="+third-party"/>
</webApplication>
----

For more information about MicroProfile Telemetry, see:

* link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-telemetry[MicroProfile Telemetry spec]

> * link:https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.11.0/specification/trace/api.md[OpenTelemetry spec]

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* link:https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.25.0/specification/trace/api.md[OpenTelemetry spec]

```

To use the CRaC 1.3 functionality with the `springBoot-3.0` feature, you must be running with Java 17 or higher and use the `crac-1.3` feature.  Additionally, if your application uses Servlet, it  needs to use the `servlet-6.0` feature.  These features are configured in the `server.xml` file as follows:

[source,xml]
----
<features>
   <feature>springBoot-3.0</feature>
   <feature>servlet-6.0</feature>
   <feature>crac-1.3</feature>
</features>
----

With these features enabled you can containerize your Spring Boot 3.2 application with Liberty InstantOn support by following the link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/instanton.html[Liberty InstantOn documentation] along with following the Liberty recommendations for containerizing Spring Boot applications with the link:{url-prefix}/guides/spring-boot.html[Liberty Spring Boot guide].

For more information and an example Spring Boot application using the Liberty InstantOn `crac-1.3` feature see the link:/blog/2023/09/26/spring-boot-3-instant-on.html[How to containerize your Spring Boot application for rapid startup] blog post.

> You can also use the `crac-1.3` feature with other applications, such as applications using Jakarta EE or MicroProfile.  Such applications can register resources with CRaC to get notifications for checkpoint and restore. This allows applications to perform actions necessary to prepare for a checkpoint as well as perform necessary actions when the application is restored.  For more information on the `org.crac` APIs see the link:https://javadoc.io/doc/org.crac/crac/latest/index.html[org.crac] Java Doc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also use the `crac-1.3` feature with other applications, such as applications using Jakarta EE or MicroProfile.  Such applications can register resources with CRaC to get notifications for checkpoint and restore. This allows applications to perform actions necessary to prepare for a checkpoint as well as perform necessary actions when the application is restored.  For more information on the `org.crac` APIs see the link:https://javadoc.io/doc/org.crac/crac/latest/index.html[org.crac] Javadoc.

```

---
layout: post
title: "MicroProfile 6.1, Java 21, and fast startup times for Spring Boot apps on Open Liberty 23.0.0.10-beta"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/lauracowen
author_github: https://github.com/lauracowen
seo-title: MicroProfile 6.1, Java 21, and fast startup times for Spring Boot apps on Open Liberty 23.0.0.10-beta - OpenLiberty.io
seo-description: Previews of MicroProfile 6.1, Java 21, faster startup for Spring Boot apps, Jakarta Data beta 3.
blog_description: Previews of MicroProfile 6.1, Java 21, faster startup for Spring Boot apps, Jakarta Data beta 3.
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
open-graph-image-alt: Open Liberty Logo
---
= MicroProfile 6.1, Java 21, and fast startup times for Spring Boot apps on Open Liberty 23.0.0.10-beta
Laura Cowen <https://github.com/lauracowen>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /
//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.

> This beta previews the abundance of new capabilities that the Open Liberty team are currently working on, including MicroProfile 6.1 (Metrics, Telemetry, and OpenAPI) and Java 21. It also introduces the ability to give your Spring Boot applications faster startup times with little or no extra effort by using Liberty InstantOn; if you have any Spring apps to hand, give it a try. There are a couple of new updates too that make it easier to manage security configurations in containerized environments, and a preview of Jakarta Data beta 3.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This beta previews the abundance of new capabilities that the Open Liberty team are currently working on, including MicroProfile 6.1 (Metrics, Telemetry, and OpenAPI) and Java 21. It also introduces faster startup times for your Spring Boot applications with little or no extra effort by using Liberty InstantOn; if you have any Spring apps to hand, give it a try. There are a couple of new updates that make it easier to manage security configurations in containerized environments, and a preview of Jakarta Data beta 3.

```

// // // // // // // //
// Change the RELEASE_SUMMARY to an introductory paragraph. This sentence is really
// important because it is supposed to grab the readers attention.  Make sure to keep the blank lines 
//
// Throughout the doc, replace 23.0.0.10-beta with the version number of Open Liberty, eg: 22.0.0.2-beta
// // // // // // // //

The link:{url-about}[Open Liberty] 23.0.0.10-beta includes the following beta features (along with link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/feature-overview.html[all GA features]):

* <<sbcrac, Faster startup of Spring Boot apps (Spring Boot 3.0 InstantOn with CRaC)>>
* <<java21, Java 21 support>>
* <<mp61, MicroProfile 6.1 support>>
* <<mpmetrics, Configure statistics tracked by Histogram and Timer metrics (MicroProfile Metrics 5.1)>>
* <<mptel, Updated OpenTelemetry implementation (MicroProfile Telemetry 1.1)>>
* <<mpapi, OpenAPI doc endpoint path configuration (MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1)>>
* <<data, Configure the data source used to query and persist data (Jakarta Data Beta 3)>>
* <<ltpa, Support LTPA keys rotation without requiring planned outage>>

> * <<dropin, Allow including directories containing configDropins>>

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* <<include, Support a directory as a valid location to include in the server's configuration>>

```

Reviewer 2: Going to go with David's similar wording.

// change the SUB_TAG_1/2/3 to the heading tags
//
// However if there's only 1 new feature, delete the previous section and change it to the following sentence:
// "The link:{url-about}[Open Liberty] 23.0.0.10-beta includes SUB_FEATURE_TITLE"
// // // // // // // //

See also link:{url-prefix}/blog/?search=beta&key=tag[previous Open Liberty beta blog posts].

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // // 
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/26059
// Contact/Reviewer: sebratton,tjwatson
// // // // // // // // 
[#sbcrac]
== Faster startup of Spring Boot apps (Spring Boot 3.0 InstantOn with CRaC)
    
Open Liberty InstantOn provides fast startup times for MicroProfile and Jakarta EE applications. With link:{url-prefix}/blog/2023/06/29/rapid-startup-instanton.html[InstantOn], your applications can start in milliseconds, without compromising on throughput, memory, development-production parity, or Java language features. InstantOn uses the Checkpoint/Restore In Userspace (link:https://criu.org/[CRIU]) feature of the Linux kernel to take a checkpoint of the JVM that can be restored later. 

> The Spring Framework (version 6.1) is adding link:https://docs.spring.io/spring-framework/reference/6.1/integration/checkpoint-restore.html[support for Coordinated Restore at Checkpoint (CRaC)] which also uses CRIU in order to provide Checkpoint and Restore for Java applications.  The Spring Boot version 3.2 will use Spring Framework version 6.1, enabling Spring Boot applications to also use CRaC to achieve rapid startup times.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The Spring Framework (version 6.1) is adding link:https://docs.spring.io/spring-framework/reference/6.1/integration/checkpoint-restore.html[support for Coordinated Restore at Checkpoint (CRaC)], which also uses CRIU to provide Checkpoint and Restore for Java applications.  The Spring Boot version 3.2 will use Spring Framework version 6.1, enabling Spring Boot applications to also use CRaC to achieve rapid startup times.

```

> The recent addition of the Open Liberty `springBoot-3.0` feature allows Spring Boot 3.x-based applications to be deployed with Open Liberty.  And now, with the new Open Liberty `crac-1.3` feature, a Spring Boot 3.2-based application can be deployed with Liberty InstantOn in order to achieve rapid startup times for your Spring Boot application.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The recent addition of the Open Liberty `springBoot-3.0` feature allows Spring Boot 3.x-based applications to be deployed with Open Liberty.  And now, with the new Open Liberty `crac-1.3` beta feature, a Spring Boot 3.2-based application can be deployed with Liberty InstantOn to achieve rapid startup times for your Spring Boot application.

```

Reviewer 6: is `crac-1.3` a beta-only feature? Not sure if that should be called out here

Reviewer 2: I see what you mean. I've added "beta" as it's not an existing GA feature as far as I can see.

To use the CRaC 1.3 functionality with the `springBoot-3.0` feature, you must be running with Java 17 or higher and use the `crac-1.3` feature.  Additionally, if your application uses Servlet, it  needs to use the `servlet-6.0` feature.  These features are configured in the `server.xml` file as follows:

[source,xml]
----
<features>
   <feature>springBoot-3.0</feature>
   <feature>servlet-6.0</feature>
   <feature>crac-1.3</feature>
</features>
----

With these features enabled you can containerize your Spring Boot 3.2 application with Liberty InstantOn support by following the link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/instanton.html[Liberty InstantOn documentation] along with following the Liberty recommendations for containerizing Spring Boot applications with the link:{url-prefix}/guides/spring-boot.html[Liberty Spring Boot guide].

> For more information and an example Spring Boot application using the Liberty InstantOn `crac-1.3` feature see the link:/blog/2023/09/26/spring-boot-3-instant-on.html[How to containerize your Spring Boot application for rapid startup] blog post.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
For more information and an example Spring Boot application using the Liberty InstantOn `crac-1.3` feature, see the link:/blog/2023/09/26/spring-boot-3-instant-on.html[How to containerize your Spring Boot application for rapid startup] blog post.

```

> You can also use the `crac-1.3` feature with other applications, such as applications using Jakarta EE or MicroProfile.  Such applications can register resources with CRaC to get notifications for checkpoint and restore. This allows applications to perform actions necessary to prepare for a checkpoint as well as perform necessary actions when the application is restored.  For more information on the `org.crac` APIs see the link:https://javadoc.io/doc/org.crac/crac/latest/index.html[org.crac] Javadoc.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
You can also use the `crac-1.3` feature with other applications, such as applications using Jakarta EE or MicroProfile. Such applications can register resources with CRaC to get notifications for checkpoint and restore. This allows applications to perform actions necessary to prepare for a checkpoint as well as perform necessary actions when the application is restored.  For more information on the `org.crac` APIs, see the link:https://javadoc.io/doc/org.crac/crac/latest/index.html[org.crac] Javadoc.

```

    
    
// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> 

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // // 
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/26192
// Contact/Reviewer: gjwatts
// // // // // // // // 
[#java21]
== Java 21 support

> Java 21 is finally here and it is the latest long term support (LTS) release since Java 17 was released two years ago.  It offers some new functionality and changes that you are going to want to check out for yourself.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Java 21 is finally here, the first long term support (LTS) release since Java 17 was released two years ago. It offers some new functionality and changes that you are going to want to check out for yourself.

```

Here are some highlights from new JEP changes in Java 18-21:

* 400: link:https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/400[UTF-8 by Default]
* 408: link:https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/408[Simple Web Server]
* 413: link:https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/413[Code Snippets in Java API Documentation]
* 416: link:https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/416[Reimplement Core Reflection with Method Handles]
* 418: link:https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/418[Internet-Address Resolution SPI]
* 421: link:https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/421[Deprecate Finalization for Removal]
* 422: link:https://openjdk.org/jeps/422[Linux/RISC-V Port]
* 431: link:https://openjdk.org/jeps/431[Sequenced Collections]
* 439: link:https://openjdk.org/jeps/439[Generational ZGC]
* 440: link:https://openjdk.org/jeps/440[Record Patterns]
* 441: link:https://openjdk.org/jeps/441[Pattern Matching for switch]
* 449: link:https://openjdk.org/jeps/449[Deprecate the Windows 32-bit x86 Port for Removal]
* 451: link:https://openjdk.org/jeps/451[Prepare to Disallow the Dynamic Loading of Agents]
* 452: link:https://openjdk.org/jeps/452[Key Encapsulation Mechanism API]

But perhaps the most anticipated one of all is the introduction of Virtual Threads in Java 21:

> * 444: link:https://openjdk.org/jeps/444[Virtual Threads]

Reviewer 7: This subsection feels like the most important part of the Java 21 section, but the way it renders, it mostly gets lost.  Some visual emphasis (maybe some use of bold and/or indenting the list above this section) would help here.

Reviewer 2: Fair. I've moved it to near the top of the section; works better there.

> Will the impact of Virtual Threads live up to the anticipation?  Find out for yourself by experimenting with them, or with any of the other new features in Java 21, by trying them out in your applications run on the best server runtime, Open Liberty!

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Will the impact of Virtual Threads live up to the anticipation?  Find out for yourself by experimenting with them, or with any of the other new features in Java 21, by trying them out in your applications run on the best Java runtime, Open Liberty!

```

As it is a milestone release of Java, we thought you might like to try it out a little early (we have been testing against Java 21 build 35 ourselves).  Take advantage of trying out the new changes in Java 21 now and get more time to review your applications, microservices, and runtime environments.

Just:

> 1. link:https://jdk.java.net/21/[Download the latest release of Java 21]

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
1. link:https://jdk.java.net/21/[Download the latest release of Java 21].

```

> 2. Get the link:https://openliberty.io/downloads/#runtime_betas[23.0.0.10-beta] version of Open Liberty

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
2. Get the link:https://openliberty.io/downloads/#runtime_betas[23.0.0.10-beta] version of Open Liberty.

```

> 3. Edit your Liberty server's link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/reference/config/server-configuration-overview.html#server-env[server.env file] to point JAVA_HOME to your Java 21 installation

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
3. Edit your Liberty server's link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/reference/config/server-configuration-overview.html#server-env[server.env file] to point JAVA_HOME to your Java 21 installation.

```

> 3. Edit your Liberty server's link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/reference/config/server-configuration-overview.html#server-env[server.env file] to point JAVA_HOME to your Java 21 installation

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
3. Edit your Liberty's link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/reference/config/server-configuration-overview.html#server-env[server.env file] to point JAVA_HOME to your Java 21 installation

```

* link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/coreprofile/10/[Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile]
* link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-config/releases/tag/3.1-RC1[MicroProfile Config 3.1]
* link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-fault-tolerance/releases/tag/4.0.2[MicroProfile Fault Tolerance 4.0]
* link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-metrics/releases/tag/5.1.0-RC1[MicroProfile Metrics 5.1]
* link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-health/releases/tag/4.0.1[MicroProfile Health 4.0]
* link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-telemetry/releases/tag/1.1-RC1[MicroProfile Telemetry 1.1]
* link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-open-api/releases/tag/3.1[MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1]
* link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-jwt-auth/releases/tag/2.1[MicroProfile JWT Authentication 2.1]
* link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-rest-client/releases/tag/3.0.1[MicroProfile Rest Client 3.0]

The following three specifications have minor updates, while the other five specifications remain unchanged:

> * MicroProfile Telemetry 1.1 (minor update)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* MicroProfile Telemetry 1.1 

```

> * MicroProfile Metrics 5.1 (minor update)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* MicroProfile Metrics 5.1 

```

> * MicroProfile Config 3.1 (minor update; mainly some TCK updates to ensure the tests run against either CDI 3.x or CDI 4.0 Lite)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* MicroProfile Config 3.1 (mainly some TCK updates to ensure the tests run against either CDI 3.x or CDI 4.0 Lite)

```

See the following sections for more details about each of these features and how to try them out.
    
    
// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> 

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // // 
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/26027
// Contact/Reviewer: Channyboy
// // // // // // // // 
[#mpmetrics]

> == Configure statistics tracked by Histogram and Timer metrics (MicroProfile Metrics 5.1)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
== MicroProfile Metrics 5.1: configure statistics tracked by Histogram and Timer metrics 

```

> MicroProfile Metrics 5.1 includes new MicroProfile Config properties which are used for configuring the statistics that are tracked and outputted by the Histogram and Timer metrics. In MicroProfile Metrics 5.0, the Histogram and Timer metrics only track and output the _max_ recorded value, the _sum_ of all values, the _count_ of the recorded values, and a static set of percentiles for the 50th, 75th, 95th, 98th, 99th, and 99.9th percentile. These values are output to the `/metrics` endpoint in Prometheus format.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
MicroProfile Metrics 5.1 includes new MicroProfile Config properties, which are used for configuring the statistics that the Histogram and Timer metrics track and output. In MicroProfile Metrics 5.0, the Histogram and Timer metrics only track and output the _max_ recorded value, the _sum_ of all values, the _count_ of the recorded values, and a static set of percentiles for the 50th, 75th, 95th, 98th, 99th, and 99.9th percentile. These values are emitted to the `/metrics` endpoint in Prometheus format.

```

The new properties introduced in MicroProfile Metrics 5.1 allow you to define a custom set of percentiles as well as a custom set of histogram buckets for the Histogram and Timer metrics. There are also additional configuration properties for enabling a default set of histogram buckets, including properties for defining an upper and lower bound for the bucket set.

> The properties in the following table allow you to define a semi-colon-separated list of value definitions using the syntax:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The properties in the following table allow you to define a semicolon-separated list of value definitions using the syntax:

```

[source]
----
metric_name=value_1[,value_2…value_n]
----

> Where:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
```

> * Some properties can accept multiple values for a given metric name while some can only accept a single value.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
```

> * You can use an asterisk (i.e., *) as a wild card at the end of the metric name.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
```

[cols="1,1"]
|===
| Property  |Description
| mp.metrics.distribution.percentiles

> | Defines a custom set of percentiles for matching Histogram and Timer metrics to track and output. Accepts a set of integer and decimal values for a metric name pairing. Can be used to disable percentile output if no value is provided with a metric name pairing.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
| - Defines a custom set of percentiles for matching Histogram and Timer metrics to track and output. 
- Accepts a set of integer and decimal values for a metric name pairing. 
- Can be used to disable percentile output if no value is provided with a metric name pairing.

```

Reviewer 6: not 100% sure list will work in table cell but I think it does and will improve readability

| mp.metrics.distribution.histogram.buckets

> | Defines a custom set of (cumulative) histogram buckets for matching Histogram metrics to track and output.  Accepts a set of integer and decimal values for a metric name pairing.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
| - Defines a custom set of (cumulative) histogram buckets for matching Histogram metrics to track and output.  
- Accepts a set of integer and decimal values for a metric name pairing.

```

| mp.metrics.distribution.timer.buckets

> | Defines a custom set of (cumulative) histogram buckets for matching Timer metrics to track and output.  Accepts a set of decimal values with a time unit appended (i.e., ms, s, m, h) for a metric name pairing.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
| - Defines a custom set of (cumulative) histogram buckets for matching Timer metrics to track and output.
 - Accepts a set of decimal values with a time unit appended (i.e., ms, s, m, h) for a metric name pairing.

```

|mp.metrics.distribution.percentiles-histogram.enabled

> | Configures any matching Histogram or Timer metric to provide a large set of default histogram buckets to allow for percentile configuration with a monitoring tool. Accepts a true/false value for a metric name pairing.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
| - Configures any matching Histogram or Timer metric to provide a large set of default histogram buckets to allow for percentile configuration with a monitoring tool. 
- Accepts a true/false value for a metric name pairing.

```

| mp.metrics.distribution.histogram.max-value

> | When percentile-histogram is enabled for a Timer, this property defines a upper bound for the buckets reported. Accepts a single integer or decimal value for a metric name pairing.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
| - When percentile-histogram is enabled for a Timer, this property defines a upper bound for the buckets reported. 
- Accepts a single integer or decimal value for a metric name pairing.

```

| mp.metrics.distribution.histogram.min-value

> | When percentile-histogram is enabled for a Timer, this property defines a lower bound for the buckets reported. Accepts a single integer or decimal value for a metric name pairing.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
| - When percentile-histogram is enabled for a Timer, this property defines a lower bound for the buckets reported. 
- Accepts a single integer or decimal value for a metric name pairing.

```

|mp.metrics.distribution.timer.max-value

> | When percentile-histogram is enabled for a Histogram, this property defines a upper bound for the buckets reported. Accepts a single decimal values with a time unit appended (i.e., ms, s, m, h) for a metric name pairing. Accepts for a single decimal value with a time unit appended (i.e., ms, s, m, h) for a metric name pairing.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
| - When percentile-histogram is enabled for a Histogram, this property defines a upper bound for the buckets reported. 
- Accepts a single decimal values with a time unit appended (i.e., ms, s, m, h) for a metric name pairing.
```

|mp.metrics.distribution.timer.min-value

> | When percentile-histogram is enabled for a Histogram, this property defines a lower bound for the buckets reported. Accepts a single decimal value with a time unit appended (i.e., ms, s, m, h) for a metric name pairing.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
| - When percentile-histogram is enabled for a Histogram, this property defines a lower bound for the buckets reported. 
- Accepts a single decimal value with a time unit appended (i.e., ms, s, m, h) for a metric name pairing.

```

|===

> 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion

For these properties:

Some properties can accept multiple values for a given metric name while some can only accept a single value.
You can use an asterisk (i.e., *) as a wild card at the end of the metric name.
```

For example, the `mp.metrics.distribution.percentiles` can be defined as:

[source]
----
mp.metrics.distribution.percentiles=alpha.timer=0.5,0.7,0.75,0.8;alpha.histogram=0.8,0.85,0.9,0.99;delta.*=
----

> This example creates the `alpha.timer` timer metric to track and output the 50th, 70th, 75th, and 80th percentile values. The `alpha.histogram` histogram metric outputs the 80th, 85th, 90th, and 99th percentiles values. Any Histogram or Timer metric that matches with `delta.*` has its percentiles disabled.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This example creates the `alpha.timer` timer metric to track and output the 50th, 70th, 75th, and 80th percentile values. The `alpha.histogram` histogram metric outputs the 80th, 85th, 90th, and 99th percentiles values. Percentiles are disabled for any Histogram or Timer metric that matches with `delta.*` .

```

> We'll expand on the above example and define histogram buckets for the `alpha.timer` timer metric using the `mp.metrics.distribution.timer.buckets` property:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
We'll expand on the previous example and define histogram buckets for the `alpha.timer` timer metric using the `mp.metrics.distribution.timer.buckets` property:

```

[source,xml]
----
mp.metrics.distribution.timer.buckets=alpha.timer=100ms,200ms,1s
----

> This configuration tells the metrics runtime to track and output the count of durations that fall within 0-100ms, 0-200ms, and 0-1 seconds. This is due to the  histogram buckets working in a _cumulative_ fashion.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This configuration tells the metrics runtime to track and output the count of durations that fall within 0-100ms, 0-200ms, and 0-1 seconds. These values are ranges because the histogram buckets work _cumulatively_ .

```

The corresponding Prometheus output for the `alpha.timer` metric at the `/metrics` REST endpoint is:

[source]
----
# HELP alpha_timer_seconds_max  
# TYPE alpha_timer_seconds_max gauge
alpha_timer_seconds_max{scope="application",} 5.633
# HELP alpha_timer_seconds  
# TYPE alpha_timer_seconds histogram <1>
alpha_timer_seconds{scope="application",quantile="0.5",} 0.67108864
alpha_timer_seconds{scope="application",quantile="0.7",} 5.603590144
alpha_timer_seconds{scope="application",quantile="0.75",} 5.603590144
alpha_timer_seconds{scope="application",quantile="0.8",} 5.603590144
alpha_timer_seconds_bucket{scope="application",le="0.1",} 0.0 <2>
alpha_timer_seconds_bucket{scope="application",le="0.2",} 0.0 <2>
alpha_timer_seconds_bucket{scope="application",le="1.0",} 1.0 <2>
alpha_timer_seconds_bucket{scope="application",le="+Inf",} 2.0  <2><3>
alpha_timer_seconds_count{scope="application",} 2.0
alpha_timer_seconds_sum{scope="application",} 6.333
----

> * The Prometheus metric type is `histogram`. Both the quantiles or percentiles and buckets are represented under this type. 

Reviewer 8: These should have the <1> , <2> , <3> which correspond to the <1> <2> <3> annotations in the example above.

> * The Prometheus metric type is `histogram`. Both the quantiles or percentiles and buckets are represented under this type. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<1> The Prometheus metric type is `histogram`. Both the quantiles or percentiles and buckets are represented under this type. 

```

> * The `le` tag represents _less than_ and is for the defined buckets, which are converted to seconds.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<2> The `le` tag represents _less than_ and is for the defined buckets, which are converted to seconds.

```

> * Prometheus requires that a `+Inf` bucket, which counts all hits.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Prometheus requires a `+Inf` bucket, which counts all hits.

```

> * Prometheus requires that a `+Inf` bucket, which counts all hits.

Reviewer 7: Callouts to match the code snippet 
```suggestion
<1> The Prometheus metric type is `histogram`. Both the quantiles or percentiles and buckets are represented under this type. 
<2> The `le` tag represents _less than_ and is for the defined buckets, which are converted to seconds.
<3> Prometheus requires a `+Inf` bucket, which counts all hits.

```

> * Prometheus requires that a `+Inf` bucket, which counts all hits.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<3> Prometheus requires that a `+Inf` bucket, which counts all hits.

```

    
  
// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> 

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // // 
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/26183
// Contact/Reviewer: yasmin-aumeeruddy
// // // // // // // // 
[#mptel]

> == Updated OpenTelemetry implementation (MicroProfile Telemetry 1.1)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
== MicroProfile Telemetry 1.1: updated OpenTelemetry implementation 

```

MicroProfile Telemetry 1.1 provides developers with the latest Open Telemetry technology; the feature now consumes OpenTelemetry-1.29.0, updated from 1.19.0. Consequently, a lot of the dependencies are now stable. 

To enable the MicroProfile Telemetry 1.1 feature, add the following configuration to your `server.xml`:

[source,xml]
----
<features>
   <feature>mpTelemetry-1.1</feature>
</features>
----

> Additionally, third-party APIs must be made visible for your application in the `server.xml`:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Additionally, you must make third-party APIs visible for your application in the `server.xml`:

```

[source,xml]
----
<webApplication location="demo-microprofile-telemetry-inventory.war" contextRoot="/">
    <!-- enable visibility to third party apis -->
    <classloader apiTypeVisibility="+third-party"/>
</webApplication>
----

For more information about MicroProfile Telemetry, see:

* link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-telemetry[MicroProfile Telemetry spec]
* link:https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.25.0/specification/trace/api.md[OpenTelemetry spec]

* link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/microprofile-telemetry.html[MicroProfile Telemetry docs]
   
   
// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> 

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // // 
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/26222
// Contact/Reviewer: Azquelt
// // // // // // // // 

[#mpapi]

> == OpenAPI doc endpoint path configuration (MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
== MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1: OpenAPI doc endpoint path configuration

```

MicroProfile OpenAPI generates and serves OpenAPI documentation for JAX-RS applications that are deployed to the Open Liberty server. The OpenAPI documentation is served from `/openapi` and a user interface for browsing this documentation is served from `/openapi/ui`.

With MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1, you can configure the paths for these endpoints by adding configuration to your `server.xml`. For example:
     
[source,xml]
----
<mpOpenAPI docPath="/my/openapi/doc/path" uiPath="/docsUi" />
----

> Setting this configuration on a local test server would mean that you would then access the OpenAPI document at `localhost:9080/my/openapi/doc/path` and the UI at `localhost:9080/docsUi`.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
When you set this configuration on a local test server, you can then access the OpenAPI document at `localhost:9080/my/openapi/doc/path` and the UI at `localhost:9080/docsUi`.

```

This is particularly useful if you want to expose the OpenAPI documentation through a Kubernetes ingress which routes requests to different services based on the path. For example, with this ingress configuration:

[source,yaml]
----

apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Ingress
metadata:
name: my-ingress
spec:
rules:
- http:
    paths:
    - path: /appA
        pathType: Prefix
        backend:
        service:
            name: appA
            port:
            number: 9080
----

You could use the following `server.xml` configuration to ensure that the OpenAPI UI is available at `/appA/openapi/ui`:

[source,xml]
----
<mpOpenAPI docPath="/appA/openapi" />
----

> When not set, `uiPath` defaults to `docPath` with `/ui` appended.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
When `uiPath` is not set,  it defaults to the value of `docPath` with `/ui` appended.

```

    
// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> 

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // // 
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/26235
// Contact/Reviewer: njr-11
// // // // // // // // 
[#data]

> == Configure the data source used to query and persist data (Jakarta Data Beta 3)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
== Jakarta Data Beta 3: Configure the data source used to query and persist data

```

    
Jakarta Data is a new Jakarta EE specification being developed in the open that aims to standardize the popular data repository pattern across a variety of providers. Open Liberty includes the Jakarta Data 1.0 beta 3 release, which adds the ability to configure the data source that a Jakarta Data repository uses to query and persist data.

> The Open Liberty beta includes a test implementation of Jakarta Data that we are using to experiment with proposed specification features so that developers can try out these features and provide feedback to influence the specification as it is being developed. The test implementation currently works with relational databases and operates by redirecting repository operations to the built-in Jakarta Persistence provider. In preparation for Jakarta EE 11, which will require a minimum of Java 21 (not yet generally available), it runs on Java 17 and simulates the entirety of the Jakarta Data beta 3 release, plus some additional proposed features that are being considered.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The Open Liberty beta includes a test implementation of Jakarta Data that we are using to experiment with proposed specification features so that developers can try out these features and provide feedback to influence the specification as it is being developed. The test implementation currently works with relational databases and operates by redirecting repository operations to the built-in Jakarta Persistence provider. In preparation for Jakarta EE 11, which will require a minimum of Java 21 (not yet generally available), it runs on Java 17 and simulates the entirety of the Jakarta Data beta 3 release, plus some additional proposed features that are under consideration.

```

Jakarta Data beta 3 allows the use of multiple data sources, with a specification-defined mechanism for choosing which data source a repository will use.

> To use Jakarta Data, you start by defining an entity class that corresponds to your data. With relational databases, the entity class corresponds to a database table and the entity properties (public methods and fields of the entity class) generally correspond to the columns of the table. An entity class can be defined in one of the following ways:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
To use Jakarta Data, you start by defining an entity class that corresponds to your data. With relational databases, the entity class corresponds to a database table and the entity properties (public methods and fields of the entity class) generally correspond to the columns of the table. You can define an entity class in one of the following ways:

```

> * annotated with `jakarta.persistence.Entity` and related annotations from Jakarta Persistence

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Annotate the class with `jakarta.persistence.Entity` and related annotations from Jakarta Persistence.

```

> * a Java class without entity annotations, in which case the primary key is inferred from an entity property named `id` or ending with `Id`

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Define a Java class without entity annotations, in which case the primary key is inferred from an entity property named `id` or ending with `Id`.

```

> You define one or more repository interfaces for an entity, annotate those interfaces as `@Repository` and inject them into components using `@Inject`. The Jakarta Data provider supplies the implementation of the repository interface for you.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
You define one or more repository interfaces for an entity, annotate those interfaces as `@Repository`, and inject them into components using `@Inject`. The Jakarta Data provider supplies the implementation of the repository interface for you.

```

Here's a simple entity:

[source,java]
----
public class Product { // entity
    public long id;
    public String name;
    public float price;
}
----

> In the following example is a repository that defines operations relating to the entity.  It opts to specify the JNDI name of a data source where the entity data is to be stored and found:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The following example shows a repository that defines operations relating to the entity. It opts to specify the JNDI name of a data source where the entity data is to be stored and found:

```

                      password = "${example.database.password}")
public class MyServlet extends HttpServlet {
    @Inject
    Products products;

    protected void doGet(HttpServletRequest req, HttpServletResponse resp)
            throws ServletException, IOException {
        // Request only the first 20 results on a page, ordered by price, then name, then id:
        Pageable pageRequest = Pageable.size(20).sortBy(Sort.desc("price"), Sort.asc("name"), Sort.asc("id"));
        Page<Product> page1 = products.findByNameIgnoreCaseContains(searchFor, pageRequest);
    }
}
----

The `dataStore` field of `@Repository` can also point at the `id` of a `databaseStore` element or the `id` or `jndiName` of a `dataSource` element from server configuration, or the name of a resource reference that is available to the application.
    
    
// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> 

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // // 
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/26138
// Contact/Reviewer: Zech-Hein
// // // // // // // // 
[#ltpa]
== Support LTPA keys rotation without a planned outage

> Being able to rotate LTPA keys without requiring a planned outage means that you can now keep applications running without any disruption to application's user experience.  Application users would previously have had to login to their applications again after the Liberty server LTPA keys had been rotated, which is no longer necessary.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Open Liberty can now automatically generate new primary LTPA keys files while continuing to use validation keys files to validate LTPA tokens. Thios update enables you to rotate LTPA keys without any disruption to the application's user experience.  Previously, application users had to log in to their applications again after the Liberty server LTPA keys were rotated, which is no longer necessary.

```

> Primary Keys are LTPA keys in the specified keys default `ltpa.keys` file. Primary keys are used both for generating new LTPA tokens and for validating LTPA tokens. There can only be one primary keys file per Liberty Server.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Primary Keys are LTPA keys in the specified keys default `ltpa.keys` file. Primary keys are used both for generating new LTPA tokens and for validating LTPA tokens. There can only be one primary keys file per Liberty runtime.

```

> Primary Keys are LTPA keys in the specified keys default `ltpa.keys` file. Primary keys are used both for generating new LTPA tokens and for validating LTPA tokens. There can only be one primary keys file per Liberty Server.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Primary Keys are LTPA keys in the specified keys default `ltpa.keys` file. Primary keys are used both for generating new LTPA tokens and for validating LTPA tokens. There can only be one primary keys file per Liberty server.

```

> Validation keys are LTPA keys in any other `.keys` files other than the primary keys file. The validation keys are only used for validating LTPA tokens. They are _not_ used for generating new LTPA tokens. All validation keys must be located in the same directory as the primary keys file.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Validation keys are LTPA keys in any `.keys` files other than the primary keys file. The validation keys are used only for validating LTPA tokens. They are _not_ used for generating new LTPA tokens. All validation keys must be located in the same directory as the primary keys file.

```

> There are 2 ways to enable LTPA keys rotation without a planned outage:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
There are 2 ways to enable LTPA keys rotation without a planned outage: monitoring the primary keys file directory or specifying the validation keys file.

```

> *  Use the Liberty Server's new capability to monitor the directory of the primary keys file for any new validation keys files. Enable the `monitorDirectory` and `monitorInterval` attributes. For example, add the following configurations to the `server.xml`:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
=== Monitor the directory of the primary keys file for any new validation keys files. 

Enable the `monitorDirectory` and `monitorInterval` attributes. For example, add the following configurations to the `server.xml`:

```

> *  Use the Liberty Server's new capability to monitor the directory of the primary keys file for any new validation keys files. Enable the `monitorDirectory` and `monitorInterval` attributes. For example, add the following configurations to the `server.xml`:

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
*  Use the Liberty's new capability to monitor the directory of the primary keys file for any new validation keys files via the `monitorDirectory` and `monitorInterval` attributes. For example, add the following configurations to the `server.xml`:

```

+
[source,xml]
----
<ltpa monitorDirectory="true" monitorInterval="5m"/>

----
+

> The `monitorDirectory` attribute monitors the `${server.config.dir}/resources/security/` directory by default, but can monitor any directory the primary keys file is specified in. The directory monitor looks for any LTPA keys files with the `.keys` extension. The Open Liberty server reads these LTPA keys and uses them as Validation Keys.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The `monitorDirectory` attribute monitors the `${server.config.dir}/resources/security/` directory by default, but can monitor any directory the primary keys file is specified in. The directory monitor looks for any LTPA keys files with the `.keys` extension. The Open Liberty server reads these LTPA keys and uses them as validation keys.

```

> The `monitorDirectory` attribute monitors the `${server.config.dir}/resources/security/` directory by default, but can monitor any directory the primary keys file is specified in. The directory monitor looks for any LTPA keys files with the `.keys` extension. The Open Liberty server reads these LTPA keys and uses them as Validation Keys.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The `monitorDirectory` attribute monitors the `${server.config.dir}/resources/security/` directory by default, but can monitor any directory the primary keys file is specified in. The directory monitor looks for any LTPA keys files with the `.keys` extension. Liberty reads these LTPA keys and uses them as validation keys.

```

+  

> If the `monitorInterval` is set to `0`, the default value, the directory stops being monitored.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
If the `monitorInterval` is set to `0`, the default value, the directory is not monitored.

```

+

> The `ltpa.keys` file can be renamed, for example, `validation1.keys` and then the Liberty server automatically regenerates a new `ltpa.keys` file with new primary keys that are used for all new LTPA tokens created. The keys in `validation1.keys` continue to be used for validating existing LTPA tokens. 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The `ltpa.keys` file can be renamed, for example, `validation1.keys` and then Liberty automatically regenerates a new `ltpa.keys` file with new primary keys that are used for all new LTPA tokens created. The keys in `validation1.keys` continue to be used for validating existing LTPA tokens. 

```

+   

> When the `validation1.keys` are no longer needed, remove them from usage by deleting the file, or by setting `monitorDirectory` to `false`. It is recommended to remove validation keys as it can improve performance.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
When the `validation1.keys` are no longer needed, remove them by deleting the file or by setting `monitorDirectory` to `false`. It is recommended to remove unused validation keys as it can improve performance.

```

> * Specify the validation keys file and optionally specify a date-time to stop using the validation keys.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
=== Specify the validation keys file and optionally specify a date-time to stop using the validation keys.

```

   1. Copy the primary keys file (`ltpa.keys`) to a validation keys file, for example `validation1.keys`.

>    2. Modify the server configuration to use the validation keys file  by specifying a `<validationKeys>` server configuration element inside the `<ltpa>` element. For example, add the following configuration to the `server.xml` file:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
   2. Modify the server configuration to use the validation keys file  by specifying a `validationKeys` server configuration element inside the `ltpa` element. For example, add the following configuration to the `server.xml` file:

```

>    2. Modify the server configuration to use the validation keys file  by specifying a `<validationKeys>` server configuration element inside the `<ltpa>` element. For example, add the following configuration to the `server.xml` file:

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
   2. Modify the server configuration to use the validation keys file by specifying a `<validationKeys>` server configuration element inside the `<ltpa>` element. For example, add the following configuration to the `server.xml` file:

```

+
[source,xml]
----
<ltpa>
    <validationKeys fileName="validation1.keys" password="{xor}Lz4sLCgwLTs=" notUseAfterDate="2024-01-02T12:30:00Z"/>
<ltpa/>  
----
+

> The `validation1.keys` file can be removed from usage at a specified date-time in the future with the optional attribute, `notUseAfterDate`.  It is recommended to use `notUseAfterDate` to remove validation keys after a given period as it can improve performance.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The `validation1.keys` file can be removed from use at a specified date-time in the future with the optional `notUseAfterDate` attribute. It is recommended to use `notUseAfterDate` to remove validation keys after a given period as it can improve performance.

```

> The `validation1.keys` file can be removed from usage at a specified date-time in the future with the optional attribute, `notUseAfterDate`.  It is recommended to use `notUseAfterDate` to remove validation keys after a given period as it can improve performance.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The `validation1.keys` file can be removed from usage at a specified date-time in the future with the optional attribute, `notUseAfterDate`.  It is recommended to use `notUseAfterDate` to ignore validation keys after a given period as it can improve performance.

```

+
The `fileName` and `password` attributes are required in the `validationKeys` element, but `notUseAfterDate` is optional.
+
After the validation keys file is loaded from the server configuration update, the original primary keys file (`ltpa.keys`) can be deleted, which triggers new primary keys to be created while continuing to use `validation1.keys` for validation.
+
Specifying validation keys in this way can be combined with enabling monitor directory to also use validation keys that are not specified in the `server.xml` configuration at the same time. For example:

+
[source,xml]
----
<ltpa monitorDirectory="true" monitorInterval="5m">
    <validationKeys fileName="validation1.keys" password="{xor}Lz4sLCgwLTs=" notUseAfterDate="2024-01-02T12:30:00Z"/>
<ltpa/>
----

> +     

Reviewer 7: There is an extra `+` being rendered.
```suggestion

```

To see all of the Liberty `<ltpa>` server configuration options see link:/docs/latest/reference/config/ltpa.html[LTPA configuration docs].
    
    
// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> 

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // // 
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/26175
// Contact/Reviewer: rsherget
// // // // // // // // 

> [#dropin]

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
[#include]

```

> == Allow including directories containing configDropins

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
== Support a directory as a valid location to include in the server's configuration

```

> == Allow including directories containing configDropins

Reviewer 6: configDropins- is only mentioned in the heading here- what is the significance to this update? If it needs to be included we should also explain what it is since most users likely wont know.

Based on the content, i'd expect the heading to be something like "Include all files in a specified directory in your server configuration"

Reviewer 2: Ah, I re-wrote the text based on a clearer explanation over Slack. I missed the header but I like your suggestion. Thanks.

> If  you use "includes" in your `server.xml` configuration file, you can specify the location of the include files using the `include` element. However, this required that you specify the location for each include file. Now, you can place all the include files in a directory and just specify the directory location in the `include` element.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
You can use the `include` element in your `server.xml` file to specify the location of files to include in your server configuration. In previous releases,  you had to specify the location for each include file individually. Now, you can place all the included files in a directory and just specify the directory location in the `include` element.

```

> This is important because when running on Kubernetes, mounting secrets as a whole folder is the only way to have the change from the secret reflected dynamically in the running pod.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This is important because when running on Kubernetes, mounting secrets as a whole folder is the only way to reflect the change from the secret dynamically in the running pod.

```

> In the location attribute of the `<include>` element of the `server.xml` file, enter the directory that contains your configuration files. For example:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
In the `location` attribute of the `include` element of the `server.xml` file, enter the directory that contains your configuration files. For example:

```

[source,xml]
----
    <include location="./common/"/>
----

> After you have made the changes, you should see the following output in the log:

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
When a directory is used, you'll see messages like the following in your log:
```

> After you have made the changes, you should see the following output in the log:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
After you make the changes, you can see the following output in the log:

```

[source]
----
[AUDIT   ] CWWKG0028A: Processing included configuration resource: /Users/rickyherget/libertyGit/open-liberty/dev/build.image/wlp/usr/servers/com.ibm.ws.config.include.directory/common/a.xml
[AUDIT   ] CWWKG0028A: Processing included configuration resource: /Users/rickyherget/libertyGit/open-liberty/dev/build.image/wlp/usr/servers/com.ibm.ws.config.include.directory/common/b.xml
[AUDIT   ] CWWKG0028A: Processing included configuration resource: /Users/rickyherget/libertyGit/open-liberty/dev/build.image/wlp/usr/servers/com.ibm.ws.config.include.directory/common/c.xml
----

> 
> For more information about Liberty configuration includes, see link:/docs/latest/reference/config/include.html[Include configuration docs].

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The files in the directory are processed in alphabetical order and subdirectories are ignored.

For more information about Liberty configuration includes, see link:/docs/latest/reference/config/include.html[Include configuration docs].

```

// // // // // // // //

If you're using link:{url-prefix}/guides/maven-intro.html[Maven], you can install the All Beta Features package using:

[source,xml]
----
<plugin>
    <groupId>io.openliberty.tools</groupId>
    <artifactId>liberty-maven-plugin</artifactId>
    <version>3.8.2</version>
    <configuration>
        <runtimeArtifact>
          <groupId>io.openliberty.beta</groupId>
          <artifactId>openliberty-runtime</artifactId>
          <version>23.0.0.10-beta</version>
          <type>zip</type>
        </runtimeArtifact>
    </configuration>
</plugin>
----

You must also add dependencies to your pom.xml file for the beta version of the APIs that are associated with the beta features that you want to try.  For example, for Jakarta EE 10 and MicroProfile 6, you would include:
[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.eclipse.microprofile</groupId>
    <artifactId>microprofile</artifactId>
    <version>6.0-RC3</version>
    <type>pom</type>
    <scope>provided</scope>
</dependency>
<dependency>
    <groupId>jakarta.platform</groupId>
    <artifactId>jakarta.jakartaee-api</artifactId>
    <version>10.0.0</version>
    <scope>provided</scope>
</dependency>

> ----

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
You must also add dependencies to your pom.xml file for the beta version of the APIs that are associated with the beta features that you want to try.  For example, for Jakarta Data Beta 3, you would include:
[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>jakarta.data</groupId>
    <artifactId>jakarta-data-api</artifactId>
    <version>1.0.0-b3</version>
</dependency>
----

```

// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/26059
// Contact/Reviewer: sebratton,tjwatson
// // // // // // // // 
[#sbcrac]
== Faster startup of Spring Boot apps (Spring Boot 3.0 InstantOn with CRaC)
    
Open Liberty InstantOn provides fast startup times for MicroProfile and Jakarta EE applications. With link:{url-prefix}/blog/2023/06/29/rapid-startup-instanton.html[InstantOn], your applications can start in milliseconds, without compromising on throughput, memory, development-production parity, or Java language features. InstantOn uses the Checkpoint/Restore In Userspace (link:https://criu.org/[CRIU]) feature of the Linux kernel to take a checkpoint of the JVM that can be restored later. 

The Spring Framework (version 6.1) is adding link:https://docs.spring.io/spring-framework/reference/6.1/integration/checkpoint-restore.html[support for Coordinated Restore at Checkpoint (CRaC)], which also uses CRIU to provide Checkpoint and Restore for Java applications.  The Spring Boot version 3.2 will use Spring Framework version 6.1, enabling Spring Boot applications to also use CRaC to achieve rapid startup times.

> The recent addition of the Open Liberty `springBoot-3.0` feature allows Spring Boot 3.x-based applications to be deployed with Open Liberty.  And now, with the new Open Liberty `crac-1.3` feature, a Spring Boot 3.2-based application can be deployed with Liberty InstantOn to achieve rapid startup times for your Spring Boot application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The recent addition of the Open Liberty `springBoot-3.0` feature allows Spring Boot 3.x-based applications to be deployed with Open Liberty.  And now, with the new Open Liberty `crac-1.3` beta feature, a Spring Boot 3.2-based application can be deployed with Liberty InstantOn to achieve rapid startup times for your Spring Boot application.

```

// // // // // // // //
// Change the RELEASE_SUMMARY to an introductory paragraph. This sentence is really
// important because it is supposed to grab the readers attention.  Make sure to keep the blank lines 
//
// Throughout the doc, replace 23.0.0.10-beta with the version number of Open Liberty, eg: 22.0.0.2-beta
// // // // // // // //

The link:{url-about}[Open Liberty] 23.0.0.10-beta includes the following beta features (along with link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/feature-overview.html[all GA features]):

* <<sbcrac, Faster startup of Spring Boot apps (Spring Boot 3.0 InstantOn with CRaC)>>
* <<java21, Java 21 support>>
* <<mp61, MicroProfile 6.1 support>>
* <<mpmetrics, Configure statistics tracked by Histogram and Timer metrics (MicroProfile Metrics 5.1)>>
* <<mptel, Updated OpenTelemetry implementation (MicroProfile Telemetry 1.1)>>
* <<mpapi, OpenAPI doc endpoint path configuration (MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1)>>
* <<data, Configure the data source used to query and persist data (Jakarta Data Beta 3)>>
* <<ltpa, Support LTPA keys rotation without requiring planned outage>>

> * <<dropin, Allow including directories containing configDropins>>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* <<dropin, Include all files in a specified directory in your server configuration>>

```

+
The `fileName` and `password` attributes are required in the `validationKeys` element, but `notUseAfterDate` is optional.
+
After the validation keys file is loaded from the server configuration update, the original primary keys file (`ltpa.keys`) can be deleted, which triggers new primary keys to be created while continuing to use `validation1.keys` for validation.
+
Specifying validation keys in this way can be combined with enabling monitor directory to also use validation keys that are not specified in the `server.xml` configuration at the same time. For example:

+
[source,xml]
----
<ltpa monitorDirectory="true" monitorInterval="5m">
    <validationKeys fileName="validation1.keys" password="{xor}Lz4sLCgwLTs=" notUseAfterDate="2024-01-02T12:30:00Z"/>
<ltpa/>
----
+     
To see all of the Liberty `<ltpa>` server configuration options see link:/docs/latest/reference/config/ltpa.html[LTPA configuration docs].
    
    
// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> 

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // // 
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/26175
// Contact/Reviewer: rsherget
// // // // // // // // 
[#dropin]

> == Allow including directories containing configDropins

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Include all files in a specified directory in your server configuration

```

// // // // // // // //
// Change the RELEASE_SUMMARY to an introductory paragraph. This sentence is really
// important because it is supposed to grab the readers attention.  Make sure to keep the blank lines 
//
// Throughout the doc, replace 23.0.0.10-beta with the version number of Open Liberty, eg: 22.0.0.2-beta
// // // // // // // //

The link:{url-about}[Open Liberty] 23.0.0.10-beta includes the following beta features (along with link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/feature-overview.html[all GA features]):

* <<sbcrac, Faster startup of Spring Boot apps (Spring Boot 3.0 InstantOn with CRaC)>>
* <<java21, Java 21 support>>
* <<mp61, MicroProfile 6.1 support>>

> * <<mpmetrics, Configure statistics tracked by Histogram and Timer metrics (MicroProfile Metrics 5.1)>>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* <<mpmetrics, MicroProfile Metrics 5.1: configure statistics tracked by Histogram and Timer metrics>>

```

// // // // // // // //
// Change the RELEASE_SUMMARY to an introductory paragraph. This sentence is really
// important because it is supposed to grab the readers attention.  Make sure to keep the blank lines 
//
// Throughout the doc, replace 23.0.0.10-beta with the version number of Open Liberty, eg: 22.0.0.2-beta
// // // // // // // //

The link:{url-about}[Open Liberty] 23.0.0.10-beta includes the following beta features (along with link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/feature-overview.html[all GA features]):

* <<sbcrac, Faster startup of Spring Boot apps (Spring Boot 3.0 InstantOn with CRaC)>>
* <<java21, Java 21 support>>
* <<mp61, MicroProfile 6.1 support>>
* <<mpmetrics, MicroProfile Metrics 5.1: configure statistics tracked by Histogram and Timer metrics>>

> * <<mptel, Updated OpenTelemetry implementation (MicroProfile Telemetry 1.1)>>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* <<mptel, MicroProfile Telemetry 1.1: updated OpenTelemetry implementation>>

```

> * <<mpapi, OpenAPI doc endpoint path configuration (MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1)>>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* <<mpapi, MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1: OpenAPI doc endpoint path configuration>>
```

// // // // // // // //
// Change the RELEASE_SUMMARY to an introductory paragraph. This sentence is really
// important because it is supposed to grab the readers attention.  Make sure to keep the blank lines 
//
// Throughout the doc, replace 23.0.0.10-beta with the version number of Open Liberty, eg: 22.0.0.2-beta
// // // // // // // //

The link:{url-about}[Open Liberty] 23.0.0.10-beta includes the following beta features (along with link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/feature-overview.html[all GA features]):

* <<sbcrac, Faster startup of Spring Boot apps (Spring Boot 3.0 InstantOn with CRaC)>>
* <<java21, Java 21 support>>
* <<mp61, MicroProfile 6.1 support>>
* <<mpmetrics, MicroProfile Metrics 5.1: configure statistics tracked by Histogram and Timer metrics>>
* <<mptel, MicroProfile Telemetry 1.1: updated OpenTelemetry implementation>>
* <<mpapi, MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1: OpenAPI doc endpoint path configuration>>

> * <<data, Configure the data source used to query and persist data (Jakarta Data Beta 3)>>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* <<data, Jakarta Data Beta 3: configure the data source used to query and persist data>>
```

----

Setting this configuration on a local test server would mean that you would then access the OpenAPI document at `localhost:9080/my/openapi/doc/path` and the UI at `localhost:9080/docsUi`.

This is particularly useful if you want to expose the OpenAPI documentation through a Kubernetes ingress which routes requests to different services based on the path. For example, with this ingress configuration:

[source,yaml]
----

apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Ingress
metadata:
name: my-ingress
spec:
rules:
- http:
    paths:
    - path: /appA
        pathType: Prefix
        backend:
        service:
            name: appA
            port:
            number: 9080
----

You could use the following `server.xml` configuration to ensure that the OpenAPI UI is available at `/appA/openapi/ui`:

[source,xml]
----
<mpOpenAPI docPath="/appA/openapi" />
----

When not set, `uiPath` defaults to `docPath` with `/ui` appended.

    
// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> 

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // // 
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/26235
// Contact/Reviewer: njr-11
// // // // // // // // 
[#data]

> == Jakarta Data Beta 3: Configure the data source used to query and persist data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Jakarta Data Beta 3: configure the data source used to query and persist data
```

---
layout: post
title: "MicroProfile 6.1, Java 21, and fast startup times for Spring Boot apps on Open Liberty 23.0.0.10-beta"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/lauracowen
author_github: https://github.com/lauracowen
seo-title: MicroProfile 6.1, Java 21, and fast startup times for Spring Boot apps on Open Liberty 23.0.0.10-beta - OpenLiberty.io
seo-description: Previews of MicroProfile 6.1, Java 21, faster startup for Spring Boot apps, Jakarta Data beta 3.
blog_description: Previews of MicroProfile 6.1, Java 21, faster startup for Spring Boot apps, Jakarta Data beta 3.
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
open-graph-image-alt: Open Liberty Logo
---
= MicroProfile 6.1, Java 21, and fast startup times for Spring Boot apps on Open Liberty 23.0.0.10-beta
Laura Cowen <https://github.com/lauracowen>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /
//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.

> This bumper beta contains the Open Liberty team's latest standards implementation work with previews of MicroProfile 6.1 (Metrics, Telemetry, and OpenAPI), Java 21, and Jakarta Data (Beta 3) on Open Liberty. It also introduces faster startup times for your Spring Boot applications with little or no extra effort by using Liberty InstantOn; if you have any Spring apps to hand, give it a try. And there are a couple of updates that make it easier to manage security configurations in containerized environments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This huge beta contains the Open Liberty team's latest standards implementation work with previews of MicroProfile 6.1 (Metrics, Telemetry, and OpenAPI), Java 21, and Jakarta Data (Beta 3) on Open Liberty. It also introduces faster startup times for your Spring Boot applications with little or no extra effort by using Liberty InstantOn; if you have any Spring apps to hand, give it a try. And there are a couple of updates that make it easier to manage security configurations in containerized environments.

```

// // // // // // // // 
[#mpmetrics]
== MicroProfile Metrics 5.1: configure statistics tracked by Histogram and Timer metrics 

   
MicroProfile Metrics 5.1 includes new MicroProfile Config properties that are used for configuring the statistics that the Histogram and Timer metrics track and output. In MicroProfile Metrics 5.0, the Histogram and Timer metrics only track and output the _max_ recorded value, the _sum_ of all values, the _count_ of the recorded values, and a static set of percentiles for the 50th, 75th, 95th, 98th, 99th, and 99.9th percentile. These values are emitted to the `/metrics` endpoint in Prometheus format.

The new properties introduced in MicroProfile Metrics 5.1 allow you to define a custom set of percentiles as well as a custom set of histogram buckets for the Histogram and Timer metrics. There are also additional configuration properties for enabling a default set of histogram buckets, including properties for defining an upper and lower bound for the bucket set.

The properties in the following table allow you to define a semicolon-separated list of value definitions using the syntax:

[source]
----
metric_name=value_1[,value_2…value_n]
----

> [cols="1,1"]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[%header,cols="1,1"]
```

---
layout: post
title: "MicroProfile 6.1, Java 21, and fast startup times for Spring Boot apps on Open Liberty 23.0.0.10-beta"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/lauracowen
author_github: https://github.com/lauracowen
seo-title: MicroProfile 6.1, Java 21, and fast startup times for Spring Boot apps on Open Liberty 23.0.0.10-beta - OpenLiberty.io
seo-description: Previews of MicroProfile 6.1, Java 21, faster startup for Spring Boot apps, Jakarta Data beta 3.
blog_description: Previews of MicroProfile 6.1, Java 21, faster startup for Spring Boot apps, Jakarta Data beta 3.
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
open-graph-image-alt: Open Liberty Logo
---
= MicroProfile 6.1, Java 21, and fast startup times for Spring Boot apps on Open Liberty 23.0.0.10-beta
Laura Cowen <https://github.com/lauracowen>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /
//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.

> This huge beta contains the Open Liberty team's latest standards implementation work with previews of MicroProfile 6.1 (Metrics, Telemetry, and OpenAPI), Java 21, and Jakarta Data (Beta 3) on Open Liberty. It also introduces faster startup times for your Spring Boot applications with little or no extra effort by using Liberty InstantOn; if you have any Spring apps to hand, give it a try. And there are a couple of updates that make it easier to manage security configurations in containerized environments.

Reviewer 7: optional rephrasing:
```suggestion
This Open Liberty beta is packed full of the team's latest standards implementation work with previews of MicroProfile 6.1 (Metrics, Telemetry, and OpenAPI), Java 21, and Jakarta Data (Beta 3) on Open Liberty. It also introduces faster startup times for your Spring Boot applications with little or no extra effort by using Liberty InstantOn; if you have any Spring apps to hand, give it a try. And there are a couple of updates that make it easier to manage security configurations in containerized environments.

```

[source]
----
# HELP alpha_timer_seconds_max  
# TYPE alpha_timer_seconds_max gauge
alpha_timer_seconds_max{scope="application",} 5.633
# HELP alpha_timer_seconds  
# TYPE alpha_timer_seconds histogram <1>
alpha_timer_seconds{scope="application",quantile="0.5",} 0.67108864
alpha_timer_seconds{scope="application",quantile="0.7",} 5.603590144
alpha_timer_seconds{scope="application",quantile="0.75",} 5.603590144
alpha_timer_seconds{scope="application",quantile="0.8",} 5.603590144
alpha_timer_seconds_bucket{scope="application",le="0.1",} 0.0 <2>
alpha_timer_seconds_bucket{scope="application",le="0.2",} 0.0 <2>
alpha_timer_seconds_bucket{scope="application",le="1.0",} 1.0 <2>
alpha_timer_seconds_bucket{scope="application",le="+Inf",} 2.0  <2><3>
alpha_timer_seconds_count{scope="application",} 2.0
alpha_timer_seconds_sum{scope="application",} 6.333
----

<1> The Prometheus metric type is `histogram`. Both the quantiles or percentiles and buckets are represented under this type. 
<2> The `le` tag represents _less than_ and is for the defined buckets, which are converted to seconds.
<3> Prometheus requires a `+Inf` bucket, which counts all hits.

>     

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
For more information about MicroProfile Metrics, see:

* link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-telemetry[MicroProfile Metrics repo]
* link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/introduction-monitoring-metrics.html#endpoint[MicroProfile Metrics docs]

```

* link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-telemetry/releases/tag/1.1-RC1[MicroProfile Telemetry 1.1]
* link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-open-api/releases/tag/3.1[MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1]
* link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-jwt-auth/releases/tag/2.1[MicroProfile JWT Authentication 2.1]
* link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-rest-client/releases/tag/3.0.1[MicroProfile Rest Client 3.0]

The following three specifications have minor updates, while the other five specifications remain unchanged:

* MicroProfile Telemetry 1.1 

* MicroProfile Metrics 5.1 

* MicroProfile Config 3.1 (mainly some TCK updates to ensure the tests run against either CDI 3.x or CDI 4.0 Lite)

See the following sections for more details about each of these features and how to try them out.
    
    
// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> 

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // // 
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/26027
// Contact/Reviewer: Channyboy
// // // // // // // // 
[#mpmetrics]
== MicroProfile Metrics 5.1: configure statistics tracked by Histogram and Timer metrics 

   

> MicroProfile Metrics 5.1 includes new MicroProfile Config properties, which are used for configuring the statistics that the Histogram and Timer metrics track and output. In MicroProfile Metrics 5.0, the Histogram and Timer metrics only track and output the _max_ recorded value, the _sum_ of all values, the _count_ of the recorded values, and a static set of percentiles for the 50th, 75th, 95th, 98th, 99th, and 99.9th percentile. These values are emitted to the `/metrics` endpoint in Prometheus format.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
MicroProfile Metrics 5.1 includes new MicroProfile Config properties that are used for configuring the statistics that the Histogram and Timer metrics track and output. In MicroProfile Metrics 5.0, the Histogram and Timer metrics only track and output the _max_ recorded value, the _sum_ of all values, the _count_ of the recorded values, and a static set of percentiles for the 50th, 75th, 95th, 98th, 99th, and 99.9th percentile. These values are emitted to the `/metrics` endpoint in Prometheus format.

```

Jakarta Data beta 3 allows the use of multiple data sources, with a specification-defined mechanism for choosing which data source a repository will use.

To use Jakarta Data, you start by defining an entity class that corresponds to your data. With relational databases, the entity class corresponds to a database table and the entity properties (public methods and fields of the entity class) generally correspond to the columns of the table. You can define an entity class in one of the following ways:

* Annotate the class with `jakarta.persistence.Entity` and related annotations from Jakarta Persistence.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

---
layout: post
title: "MicroProfile 6.1, Java 21, and fast startup times for Spring Boot apps on Open Liberty 23.0.0.10-beta"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/lauracowen
author_github: https://github.com/lauracowen
seo-title: MicroProfile 6.1, Java 21, and fast startup times for Spring Boot apps on Open Liberty 23.0.0.10-beta - OpenLiberty.io
seo-description: Previews of MicroProfile 6.1, Java 21, faster startup for Spring Boot apps, Jakarta Data beta 3.
blog_description: Previews of MicroProfile 6.1, Java 21, faster startup for Spring Boot apps, Jakarta Data beta 3.
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
open-graph-image-alt: Open Liberty Logo
---
= MicroProfile 6.1, Java 21, and fast startup times for Spring Boot apps on Open Liberty 23.0.0.10-beta
Laura Cowen <https://github.com/lauracowen>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /
//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.

> This beta previews the abundance of new capabilities that the Open Liberty team are currently working on, including MicroProfile 6.1 (Metrics, Telemetry, and OpenAPI) and Java 21. It also introduces faster startup times for your Spring Boot applications with little or no extra effort by using Liberty InstantOn; if you have any Spring apps to hand, give it a try. There are a couple of new updates that make it easier to manage security configurations in containerized environments, and a preview of Jakarta Data beta 3.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This bumper beta contains the Open Liberty team's latest standards implementation work with previews of MicroProfile 6.1 (Metrics, Telemetry, and OpenAPI), Java 21, and Jakarta Data (Beta 3) on Open Liberty. It also introduces faster startup times for your Spring Boot applications with little or no extra effort by using Liberty InstantOn; if you have any Spring apps to hand, give it a try. And there are a couple of new updates that make it easier to manage security configurations in containerized environments.

```

// // // // // // // //
// Change the RELEASE_SUMMARY to an introductory paragraph. This sentence is really
// important because it is supposed to grab the readers attention.  Make sure to keep the blank lines 
//
// Throughout the doc, replace 23.0.0.10-beta with the version number of Open Liberty, eg: 22.0.0.2-beta
// // // // // // // //

The link:{url-about}[Open Liberty] 23.0.0.10-beta includes the following beta features (along with link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/feature-overview.html[all GA features]):

* <<sbcrac, Faster startup of Spring Boot apps (Spring Boot 3.0 InstantOn with CRaC)>>
* <<java21, Java 21 support>>
* <<mp61, MicroProfile 6.1 support>>
* <<mpmetrics, MicroProfile Metrics 5.1: configure statistics tracked by Histogram and Timer metrics>>
* <<mptel, MicroProfile Telemetry 1.1: updated OpenTelemetry implementation>>
* <<mpapi, MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1: OpenAPI doc endpoint path configuration>>
* <<data, Jakarta Data Beta 3: configure the data source used to query and persist data>>

> * <<ltpa, Support LTPA keys rotation without requiring planned outage>>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* <<ltpa, Support LTPA keys rotation without a planned outage>>
```

// // // // // // // //
// Change the RELEASE_SUMMARY to an introductory paragraph. This sentence is really
// important because it is supposed to grab the readers attention.  Make sure to keep the blank lines 
//
// Throughout the doc, replace 23.0.0.10-beta with the version number of Open Liberty, eg: 22.0.0.2-beta
// // // // // // // //

The link:{url-about}[Open Liberty] 23.0.0.10-beta includes the following beta features (along with link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/feature-overview.html[all GA features]):

* <<sbcrac, Faster startup of Spring Boot apps (Spring Boot 3.0 InstantOn with CRaC)>>
* <<java21, Java 21 support>>
* <<mp61, MicroProfile 6.1 support>>
* <<mpmetrics, MicroProfile Metrics 5.1: configure statistics tracked by Histogram and Timer metrics>>
* <<mptel, MicroProfile Telemetry 1.1: updated OpenTelemetry implementation>>
* <<mpapi, MicroProfile OpenAPI 3.1: OpenAPI doc endpoint path configuration>>
* <<data, Jakarta Data Beta 3: configure the data source used to query and persist data>>
* <<ltpa, Support LTPA keys rotation without requiring planned outage>>

> * <<dropin, Include all files in a specified directory in your server configuration>>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* <<include, Include all files in a specified directory in your server configuration>>

```
